Here we present a 13-year-old girl with inherited myopathy associated with collagenopathy. The girl was the second child
of unrelated parents. She was born at 39 weeks of gestation by elective caesarean section due to oligohydramnios and
breech presentation. Her birth weight was 2940 g (< 3 c), length was 57 cm, head circumference was 34.5 cm, and the
Apgar score was 9. During the neonatal period weak sucking, decreased muscle tone, joint laxity and hyperextension of
elbows, knees and wrists were observed. In addition, hip dysplasia was found. Motor milestones were delayed: sitting –
9-10 m, crawling – 12 m, walking – 17 m. Since early childhood she had presented a waddling gait, imbalance, problems
with climbing stairs and standing up from a sitting and kneeling position, and frequent stumbling and falling. No joint
dislocations or sprains occurred. Mental development, including speech, was normal. Comorbidities included food allergy,
 manifesting as atopic dermatitis and treated with a gluten-free diet and antihistaminic drugs. Examinations performed
at the age of 9 years revealed persistent gait abnormalities despite regular physical therapy, with imbalance and
disturbed motor coordination, probably as a result of marked hypotonia of distal muscles. The girl required assistance
during walking, and was not able to run, jump or squat. In addition to generalized muscle weakness, there was
compensating left-sided scoliosis within the Th-L spine and lack of full extension of the hips as well as restricted motor function. Joint reflexes were weak, knee reflexes absent. Isolated Achilles tendon contractures and clubfeet developed. At the age of 10 years surgical correction of the ankle equinus contracture was done by the Vulpius procedure, which included superficial gastro­cnemius-soleus recession with an intramuscular lengthening of the soleus muscle, which resulted in moderate clinical improvement. At the age of 13 years the patient was able to walk only with calf orthoses. She presented a waddling gait on a wide base, with compensating spine hyperlordosis. Physical examination findings also included: head dropping when standing up from the lying position due to weakness of axial muscles, atrophy of shoulder girdle muscles, normal spine mobility, marked distal hypotonia with finger and toe laxity, hyperflexion of small hand joints, clubfeet, ankle contractures and Gower’s sign (Fig. 1). She has been treated with deflazacort (Calcort) 6 mg with a good subjective effect with respect to global muscle strength.
Initial diagnostic work-up before panel sequencing excluded large chromosomal aberrations, the most common chromosomal
microdeletions/microduplications, Pompe disease, GM1 gangliosidosis, other metabolic myopathies, spinal muscular
atrophy, limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 2A (mutations in exon 4 and 11 of the CAPN3 gene) and laminopathy. Clinical
evolution of the disease could not support the initial diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, considered within the scope
 of the differential diagnosis.
Creatine kinase (CK) was 210 IU (n: 26-140 IU). Electromyography showed no evident myopathic pattern.
Electroneurography showed normal sensory and motor conduction. Head MRI did not show abnormalities. On echocardiography
mild aortic and mitral valve regurgitation was found.
Conventional microscopy of a quadriceps muscle specimen showed small clumps of two types of fibers with normal diameter
and of very small fibers within hypertrophic adipose tissue. Fiber division to metabolic type was abnormal, with a huge
predominance of type 1 fibers. On ultrastructural examination there were atrophic fibers and very small uninuclear
fibers, resembling myotubes (immature cells). These cells were surrounded by overgrown collagen (Supplementary Fig. 1).
